Bitcoin is a game changer. It allows anyone to take care of their own assets and move them whenever and however they want without anyone being able to prevent this. No company or government can prevent you from moving your own money or being able to take it from you if you save it sovereignly.

Sovereignty is the word here. You are your own bank. But to actually do this, you need to know how to use tools, wallets and how to withdraw your Bitcoin from the hands of these intermediaries.

In the previous class you learned what Bitcoin wallets are and why it is important to save seeds well so you always have access to your balance. The next step is to fill that wallet with Bitcoin and start accumulating for the future. So in this class we will consider that you already have bitcoin and want to send it from the exchange address to your wallet address.

But before doing this in practice, let's understand what addresses are and how a transaction works on the bitcoin network.


(slide 272)
When you configure your bitcoin wallet it generates a list of words called "seed phrase". These words represent codes that allow you to receive, store and send bitcoin. From the seeds, your wallet will generate other encrypted codes called public and private keys.

The private key is a sequence of letters and numbers that allows you to sign transactions and control your wallet balance. With it you can move bitcoin from one address to another or import a specific balance. When you send bitcoin from one wallet to another, it is the private key that authorizes the balance to be moved. Therefore, you should not share your seed or your private wallet keys with anyone. That's why it got its name: it's private, it's information that should be kept just for you.

The big difference between a seed and a private key is that a seed phrase (a list of 12, 18 or 24 words) can recover several private keys from several linked balances, while the private key only recovers the balances of the addresses it generated. It is at these addresses that you will receive Bitcoin.

Addresses are generated from these keys and they are public. When you make a transaction, they appear on the blockchain for anyone to verify your transaction. It is not possible to discover the seed or the private key from an address, even if it is visible on the bitcoin blockchain. But if you don't take good care of the seeds or private keys, then the person will have access not only to your Bitcoin, but to all the keys and addresses generated by them.


(slide 273)
A wallet can generate thousands of different addresses from the public key. Its function is to generate addresses. In fact, one of the best practices with bitcoin is to never reuse addresses. Wallets always generate new addresses after you make a transaction, just to have more privacy and avoid reuse. If you have ever used a bitcoin wallet you will notice that with each transaction the address changes, this is on purpose. After all, after a transaction is made, addresses are publicly visible on the blockchain and it would be easier to track balances by association.

In short, the private key unlocks the wallet owner's right to spend, move and transact the coins associated with that wallet. As the name says, it's private and you shouldn't show it to other people. The address is where you will send Bitcoin when you make a transaction. No one can guess your private key from your address.

(slide 274)
I like to think of the address as your home address. You even share it with other people, it's something relatively public, but you also don't go around with a megaphone telling everyone where you live. Sometimes you need to show your address to receive a delivery, but that doesn't mean people will be able to access your home, for that you need to have the keys to the door. In the case of wallets: private keys.

So the address is like your home address and the private keys are what give you access to what's inside: your bitcoin balance.

Remembering that your bitcoins are not stored inside wallets. They are always on the blockchain. Bitcoins are always at an address on the blockchain network and not inside the device itself. When you make a transfer, you tell the network that you want to move "x amount" of bitcoin from one address to another address. Wallets perform the function of authorizing these transactions that take bitcoins from one address to another through a digital signature made with the private key.

But then how does a transaction work?

(slide 275)
You open your wallet, enter the amount you want to send, paste the recipient's address and click send. When you click send, you are signing the transaction with your private key. This is what happens behind the wallet codes.


(slide 276)
When you sign the transaction proving to the bitcoin network that you are the true owner of the wallet address's private key, this transaction goes to a waiting room, known as a mempool. This is the waiting room for transactions that wait until they are inserted into a block by miners. Transactions are recorded on the blockchain when a miner selects transactions to be part of the information block. As soon as a miner enters the transaction into a block, that block is verified by the network and it updates its blockchain records. Then this block is propagated throughout the network as a valid block, with the transaction inside it.

When a transaction is inserted into a block it is said to have been confirmed. As more blocks are mined, more confirmations happen. Generally a transaction is considered irreversible after 6 confirmations, when six blocks have passed. When confirmations happen, the wallet notifies the user, the transaction is considered received and the balance is available to be spent. This is how on chain transactions happen when you send bitcoin.

Well, now that you understand the theory, let's get to practice!

I will now show you how to set up a wallet from scratch, withdraw Bitcoin from the exchange to that wallet and recover the balance using the seed phrase.

For this tutorial we chose to use the Sparrow Wallet, because it is a very versatile and complete wallet for both beginners and advanced users. It is self-custodial, open source and works very well as a coordinating wallet between different brands of hardware wallets: jade, ledger, trezor, coldcard, seed signer, krux... in short... practically all hardware works with Sparrow. The difference is that wallets that have their own software such as ledger and trezor, anyway ask you to download the ledger live or trezor suite software to update the device's firmware before connecting to Sparrow.

It also offers features such as creating multisigs, making air gapped transactions, PSBT, managing and consolidating UTXO, possibilities that focus on increasing wallet security and privacy. Remember then that Sparrow is a desktop-only wallet, it does not have an app for cell phones, iOS or Android. I'll leave the link here on the screen for you to download and also a list of other wallets for you to test and see which one suits you best. 

Let's start by configuring Sparrow. The first step is to download Sparrow and install the software. 


(video)
Then just open Sparrow and click on "new wallet" to create a new wallet. 

Now just choose a custom name for this wallet, I will type "btc4all tutorial" and click on "create wallet". 

This is Sparrow's home page. Notice how the left column is gray and only the settings are in blue. It means that it is zero and you need to create a wallet, import or connect one so that you can track balances, receive and send Bitcoin.

There in "settings" it shows the type of configuration: single sig. This setup means you need just one key to sign transactions from that wallet and just one list of words to retrieve the balance. Below appears the type of script and some more technical details. 

Notice how four boxes with different options appear in the keystore field. These are ways to use Sparrow. You can connect your hardware wallet device to Sparrow and move balances through it. You can create an air gapped wallet where you never need to plug the device into your computer to sign transactions. You can create from scratch or import a wallet you already have and use Sparrow as a hot wallet or you can create a watch only wallet, to just monitor your balance and not move anything.

I will click on "New or imported software wallet" to create a wallet from scratch and show you how creating keys works. 

Here are some ways to create wallet recovery words. I'm going to click on the first Mnemonic Words option under "use 24 words". 

Here the list of empty words appears. I will click on "Generate new" for the portfolio to generate my words.

Generated words. Now just write them down carefully in the order in which they appear. I'll do this and click "Confirm Backup" to confirm that I wrote everything down.

Sparrow asks me to type the words and thus confirm that I really wrote everything down. Note that until I finish the process, the "Checksum" icon appears as invalid.

When entering the last word of the seed phrase, the checksum changes to valid, signaling that a valid sequence of words for a Bitcoin wallet was entered. The next step is to click on "Create Keystore" in the blue box.

And then click on "import keystore".

Done. The seed data I generated and all the keys were imported. Now just click on "Apply" in the bottom right corner of the screen. The wallet will ask if I want to create a password to protect the wallet in case someone gains access to my computer. I will click "no password", without a password, but it is recommended that you have a password to have another layer of security in your wallet.

Now notice how the left column suddenly turned blue. This means that the wallet is now ready to receive Bitcoin, send and manage addresses.

Well, now I'm going to show you how you will send Bitcoin to this wallet and retrieve it to test if everything is ok before sending larger amounts. It is important to do this so you can identify whether everything is working correctly before sending all your hodl to this wallet.

I will click on "receive".

And I will copy this code that appears in the "address" field. This here is my address on the Bitcoin network. And I will show you how you will send Bitcoin here to this newly created wallet. For this I will withdraw Bitcoin from the exchange. I'm just going to use Coinbase as an example, but the mechanism is the same on other platforms.

Well, here I have 43 dollars in Bitcoin, around 260 reais, and I'm going to withdraw this amount from the broker.

To do this I will click on the grid in the left corner of the screen.

Then click "send", send.

I will paste Sparrow's bitcoin address, which I had already copied, here in this field at the top of the page.

I will select Bitcoin.

Then select the Bitcoin network. All other networks are not Bitcoin, be careful not to get confused.

Now I will enter the amount I want to withdraw and click on preview to see if the information is correct.

Everything's fine here.

I'm going to click "Send now", send now.

Done. Withdrawal confirmed.

Now just follow Sparrow when the value arrives. It should take a few minutes for the network to process this transaction.

Done, the transaction arrived here at Sparrow: 40,633 satoshis are now in my custody.

Now let's imagine that I lost access to this balance in the wallet and I'm going to recover it from scratch. And then we'll see if the balance will reappear.

I closed the wallet that I created before and I will click on the third option "import wallet", import wallet.

There will be several ways to recover. I'll go with the first one, which is the way I generated it before with 24 words.

Now just enter the same words that I wrote down when I created the previous wallet and click on "Discover wallet", find wallet.

It will ask me to create a name for this wallet that I want to import. I will type "backup recovery", wallet recovered, and click "Create wallet".

Done. Sparrow pulled all the data, keys and my bitcoin balance.

Now I will do the same recovery process on a different Sparrow wallet so you can see how regardless of the application or software you use, it is possible to recover your Bitcoin balance if you have your backup word list. Then I will recover this same wallet in Blue wallet, a well-known and very easy to use cell phone wallet.

I will open my Blue Wallet on my cell phone and click on "Add Now" to create a new wallet.

I will select the last option "import wallet", import wallet.

If you want to create a wallet from scratch, just select Bitcoin and then "Create". But now I want to recover the wallet that I created in Sparrow, so I go straight to the import option.

I will type here the 24 words that I generated in Sparrow in order, taking care to type correctly, and click on "import" when finished.

Look, Blue Wallet found the wallet.

I will click on "import".

Clicking on it shows the balance I transferred from Coinbase.

This is the wonder of Bitcoin, as it is open source you can recover your balance on any device that follows the same initial rules that you used when generating your keys.

Now that you've gone through all the Bitcoin4All classes, you're ready to get your hands dirty, start accumulating and exploring the world of Bitcoin.

I hope you enjoyed Bitcoin4All and that this was just the beginning of your learning journey, after all, Bitcoin is not just a technology, it is a universe of concepts that unites economics, cryptography, decentralized networks and continuous innovation. Every day, new developments and ideas emerge, challenging our traditional notions of money and sovereignty.

Share this course with friends, relatives and other people who are also curious and want to learn about Bitcoin.

Until next time and Opt Out!
