Since Bitcoin emerged, they have created lies to try to convince people that Bitcoin is no good. In bitcoiner circles, lies are known as FUDs.


(slide 202)
FUD is the acronym for fear, uncertainty and doubt. These are narratives created to make people afraid and purposefully stay away from Bitcoin.

In this class we will unravel the main lies told about Bitcoin and the narrative attacks used to prevent people from being interested, studying and having Bitcoin. The idea is that at the end of this class you are aware, so when these FUDs appear, you know that they are nothing more than bullshit. And there is no shortage of FUD on Bitcoin, because if there is no way to stop the bitcoin network, the alternative for defenders of the fiat system is to generate fear.


(slide 203)
The first big FUD is that Bitcoin is used by criminals to commit crimes and illicit acts, used for drug trafficking, money laundering and even terrorism. It even seems that it was from Bitcoin that crime exploded! All of this already existed before Bitcoin. Do you know what is used much more frequently to commit crimes?


(slide 204)
Yes, fiat money created by central banks: the real and the dollar, for example. In most police seizures, what they have are bags and bags of physical money. And that doesn't mean people blame the central bank for crimes using government money. Why do they do the same with Bitcoin?

Criminals will use anything that has value to commit crimes. It's not Bitcoin, paper money, wine or gold bars that are to blame. Being used for crimes does not take away the value of these assets and currencies. Just like no one blames and bans knives for murders. A knife is a tool that can be used for good or evil. Bitcoin is also a tool.

The problem is the crime committed and that is what needs to be investigated and punished. Bitcoin, like gold, is neutral, you can use it to finance an orphanage, donate to charity or use it to finance a gang. It is the use that determines whether the intention is good or bad, not the tool.


(slide 205)
And it has been proven countless times that criminals mainly use banks to launder illicit money. A FinCEN files report demonstrated how banks processed more than $2 trillion in suspected criminal transactions. Even the largest banks in the world, such as Deutsche Bank and JP Morgan were on the list of entities that processed transactions arising from crimes between 1999 and 2017.

In the end, they just paid a fine and continued operating. 


(slide 206)
There is even a documentary that shows how HSBC facilitated the laundering of money from drug cartels in Mexico. In other words, banks have always processed money coming from criminals, terrorists, drug trafficking, etc. But they blame it on Bitcoin.


(slide 207)
This Elliptic research shows how at the beginning of the bitcoin network, around 35% of transactions had illicit origins. But as it became clearer that the bitcoin network is transparent and there is no way to delete transactions that have already been made, criminals stopped using the network. Today, less than 1% of transactions have an illicit origin, especially because no criminal wants to create indelible evidence about themselves. Today this type of use is less than through the dollar and the banking system.


(slide 208)
Since 2017, around 2 trillion dollars have been used for illicit activities, while 33 billion dollars worth of Bitcoin have been used to commit crimes. The dollar is used 60x more than Bitcoin for illicit purposes and 3 to 5% of dollar transactions are used to finance crime. While with Bitcoin it doesn't even reach 1%.


(slide 209)
This is what this Chainlaisys study shows. Less than 0.34% of cryptocurrency transactions overall are used for crime. This is talking about cryptos in general.


(slide 210)
Even of this 0.34%, the majority still prefer to use stablecoins, in the yellow column. In other words, criminals prefer to use dollar stablecoins than Bitcoin to commit crimes! In 2022, bitcoin ceased to be the main way for criminals to receive values ​​when compared to cryptocurrencies in general.

That's why saying that Bitcoin is for criminals is actually for people who don't know what they're talking about. You're just reproducing a false narrative you heard out there. Bitcoin is used less by criminals than the dollar and even stablecoins.


(slide 211)
The next FUD is well known: Bitcoin is a bubble!

Bubbles happen when assets appreciate too much and quickly in an unsustainable way. 

They end up exploding when investors realize that prices are much higher than the fundamental value of the asset. Bitcoin is often compared to "tulip fever," which is said to have occurred in 17th-century Holland.


(slide 212)
The story of tulips in Holland is very famous and describes how suddenly the price of tulips started to rise a lot and then people, thinking it was a good deal, started buying tulips, which made the price rise even more, leading to to a state of generalized euphoria.

When people realized that tulips were a plant and that they had no value, they started selling them and the price plummeted. From start to collapse, the tulip bubble took a little over 3 years, from 1634 to 1637. Many people watched their money melt. There are people who say that this story never happened and that it is actually a metaphor to explain how financial bubbles work. But anyway, tulips are still mentioned today and when someone calls Bitcoin a "tulip", they are referring to this story.


(slide 213)
Fiat defenders like to post this image to try to compare bitcoin with other bubbles of the past, showing how bitcoin made a movement similar to the tulip bubbles (in red), the Mississippi bubble, the South Sea bubble, etc... But what they don't show is this image here.


(slide 214)
The reality is that bitcoin has gone through several cycles over 16 years and has always recovered, breaking new highs with each passing halving. The more it goes up, the more difficult it is for it to go to zero, as many people say is easy to happen. A fact that doesn't happen with real bubbles. After they collapse, they never return to value as they did in the past.

Anyone who compares Bitcoin to bubbles is not paying attention to Bitcoin's cyclical movements and this type of comment only exposes the lack of understanding on the subject. When you update the chart, you notice that Bitcoin continues to appreciate even after more than 16 years of being called a bubble.


(slide 215)
Bitcoin moves in appreciation cycles that take it to increasingly higher levels. Every time it falls or rises, there is always a skeptic to say that Bitcoin is dead or that it is a bubble. But what happens is that Bitcoin never dies and the bubble never explodes.

Bitcoin's price curve actually reflects the adoption curve growing year after year.


(slide 216)
Another common FUD is when they say that Bitcoin has no real use. Unlike gold, which is used, for example, to make jewelry, Bitcoin has no use in the physical world and therefore has no value. If it's not tangible, it's worthless.

This is more nonsense. Increasingly, the digital world has displaced the physical world. Companies now have websites and social networks, banks have closed branches and now have apps, newspapers have stopped being printed and now publish on websites. Discrediting bitcoin just because it doesn't exist in the physical world is turning a blind eye to the digital transformation that has been happening in the world for decades!

Being digital only amplifies Bitcoin's properties as money. The fact that Bitcoin has no other secondary use in the physical world is not a disadvantage. Gold became money after centuries of competition with less scarce metals with inferior monetary properties. Its use as adornment and decoration was a case of use as a demonstration of wealth and power, not as a seal of monetary properties. A fact that had already been proven centuries before.

Bitcoin does not need to be hanging around someone's neck to have value and Bitcoin's digitality does not disqualify it from being money. If money is a tool that everyone demands to make exchanges and preserve value, bitcoin fulfills this role in a much more efficient and useful way than any other money in history precisely because it is digital and easier to verify and transport. 


(slide 217)
The fourth FUD is that Bitcoin has no intrinsic value. Although bitcoin is not backed by a physical asset like gold, it is worth noting that the dollar, the real and any fiat currency are not backed by gold or any other asset or commodity.

The value of Bitcoin is in offering for the first time an alternative, decentralized financial system that cannot be corrupted, inflated or monopolized by anyone, including governments.

Bitcoin's backing is its unique properties that no other asset offers. Bitcoin is the backing of itself and that is what it means to have intrinsic value. This talk of intrinsic value just shows how whoever says this doesn't even know how fiat money works and attacks Bitcoin out of pure ignorance.

Gold relies on its atomic properties and these are what guarantee that gold will not change. Gold is its own backing. Nobody asks what the backing of gold is, right? Bitcoin through encryption, proof of work and p2p networks digitizes and amplifies the monetary properties initially offered only by gold and which are now available even better in Bitcoin. That's what gives it value.

Bitcoin is the backing of itself, it is digital gold and that is why in the future it tends to be the backing for everything, just like gold did in the past.


(slide 218)
The fifth FUD is classic: bitcoin will be replaced by a better competitor!

Millions of cryptocurrencies have already emerged, none of them have come close to displacing Bitcoin in market capitalization or fundamentals. Despite great competition, it is increasingly clear that decentralization and the discovery of digital scarcity are unique developments in money. Even if they try, no one can replicate it.

Still have questions about this? There are more than 2 million cryptocurrencies and they all function as companies and not as a decentralized protocol. As Michael Saylor says: "there is no second best", there is no second best.


(slide 219)
The 6th FUD they spread is that Bitcoin is a game of chance, it is pure speculation. Many people treat bitcoin as something you buy low and sell high. Generally, those who do this end up taking a beating trying to guess the top and bottom. Those who treat Bitcoin as a speculative asset are precisely those who lose the most money.

Bitcoin is a new financial system being monetized. It is public, transparent and everything that will happen is known from the beginning more than a hundred years in advance. It's the opposite of a casino, where the house usually wins and has no way to audit the machines or infiltrate the administration of the business. Casinos are shady, Bitcoin is transparent.

Furthermore, anyone who buys bitcoin and holds it for at least 4 years does not make a loss with bitcoin. This is what this image shows here:


(slide 220)
Anyone who does not speculate and hold for at least 4 years does not make a loss with Bitcoin. It was positive 99% of the time and only those who bought at the top and sold are negative. As bitcoin appreciates, those who bought at past peaks also become positive. This is what has been happening since Bitcoin emerged.

Those who accumulate constantly with a long-term focus leave speculation mode and go to savings mode, as a store of value. As was done with gold in the past. Nobody keeps casino chips for the long term, but gold is kept. That's the difference. Crypto tokens and casino chips are speculative, there is an expectation that they will rise quickly to convert to fiat soon.

With Bitcoin, the focus is on accumulating as much as possible now, because we know that in the future it will be more difficult to accumulate in this price range. People save not to convert into fiat, but because all the fiat value is being converted into bitcoin, it is a new monetary denominator.

This is why Bitcoin is not a game of chance, but it is a game of luck to still be able to accumulate at such an early point of adoption and value.


(slide 221)
O 7º FUD is saying that bitcoin is not safe. And then they spread the word that it can be hacked, that governments can shut down, that Satoshi will come back and put an end to the network.


(slide 222)
Many of the misconceptions about Bitcoin's security come from attacks on exchanges and other platforms that use Bitcoin, rather than the Bitcoin network itself. Bitcoin has run securely and non-stop 99.9% of the time since it began running in 2009. No centralized network has uptime like this.

The security of the bitcoin network is guaranteed by immense computational power. Miners and nodes are distributed all over the world and there is no single point of failure to attack.

Anyone who says that Bitcoin is not safe has not stopped to study Bitcoin and is comparing it with centralized models that have nothing to do with Bitcoin. In 2024, for example, there was a global Microsoft blackout, Pix stopped working, X was turned off in Brazil.

Centralized platforms have shown that they can be censored or shut down by hackers or bugs. Bitcoin has been running non-stop for 15 years while all of these platforms have had some sort of blackout.


(slide 227)
And finally the 8th FUD: that Bitcoin harms the environment. Have you ever heard someone say that Bitcoin is terrible for the planet, that it uses a lot of energy and that it should be modified or stopped from continuing to function? This controversy could not be left out of this class.

This has been one of the biggest lies in recent times to keep people away from Bitcoin, generating fear. The first point to understand is: is wasting energy a problem?


(slide 228)
A very interesting fact is that energy and its use is completely correlated to the level of civilizational development. This graph shows that, as global GDP grew, energy consumption also grew.

As time goes by, we as a civilization tend to spend more energy, because this energy starts to be converted into technological, human, health and production advances that help us evolve. Or would you prefer to go back to the cave era when energy was barely wasted, but those were very difficult times? I imagine not...


(slide 229)
This image also shows us that, richer and more developed countries are the ones that consume the most energy. Poorer countries with lower wages consume less. Realize that energy use is fully correlated to human development.  So much so that there is a scale to measure this called the Kardashev Scale.


(slide 230)
This scale suggests that civilizational progress relies on consuming more energy, not less. The Kardashev scale is measured in watts and states that there are types of civilization according to the degree of dominance over energy sources. We here on Earth, for example, have not even managed to become a type I civilization, which dominates all the energy sources on the planet itself.

Type 2 dominates energy sources in its solar system. Type 3 dominates the energy sources of its galaxy. In other words, if we want to evolve as a species we will need more energy, not less. Therefore, spending more energy is not a problem, it is an evolutionary necessity.

So if using energy is natural and necessary, what's the point? The problem in reality is how this energy is produced and how to produce energy and bitcoin efficiently.


(slide 231)
In general, Bitcoin consumes a lot of energy, around 70.4 TWh per year, but compared to other industries it is still a very small consumption. Bitcoin consumes around 0.01% of the energy produced in the world and in tera watts of time it consumes less than the gaming industry, than gold mining and 8x less than the entire banking system.

If you compare the carbon footprint of these industries, they are also much larger than the emissions of the Bitcoin network.


(slide 232)
Bitcoin has a carbon footprint of 41 metric tons. This is 3x smaller than gold mining, the banking system, data centers and less than the clothes dryers in the entire world. The center columns are the aviation sector, marine transport and global air conditioning.

Bitcoin is responsible for just 0.07% of all CO2 emissions on the planet and, unlike other industries that are stagnant, Bitcoin tends to produce less of a carbon footprint. This will happen as new, more efficient devices are developed and as mining becomes more efficient as well. Just like when refrigerators also began to be replaced by models that use less light.


(slide 233)
Compared to other countries or industries, Bitcoin uses much more renewable energy sources, there in the green bars, than more sustainable countries like Germany, the United States, Canada and Europe. Bitcoin has at least 56% of the network made up of renewable sources, compared to 49% in Europe, 48% in Germany and 30% in the United States.

Remember mining class where we saw that Bitcoin forces miners to be efficient? So it is. These miners naturally settle in places with abundant and cheap energy, generally these places have renewable sources, and even in regions where they waste energy.


(slide 234)
This image demonstrates how bitcoin uses only 0.1% of global energy and consumes 0.4% of the energy that would otherwise be wasted. In other words, a large part of the energy that bitcoin consumes is precisely the energy that would be wasted by other industries.

What happens is that miners naturally end up installing themselves in places with surplus energy production, energy that would otherwise be thrown away. Generally, renewable sources such as hydro and geothermal are the most chosen locations, such as in Iceland, Siberia, Canada, Russia and the United States. These are places with a lot of energy and little population or industry present to consume the excess energy. These places generally cannot store all the energy produced.

That's where Bitcoin mining comes in. A plug n play industry, easy to install in any region of the planet and which provides a useful destination for this energy that was previously being thrown away. 


(slide 235)
This is where the theory of Bitcoin as a global battery that converts wasted energy into the strongest money there is emerged. Money that can be easily stored and used to buy more energy in the future if necessary.

This is why energy producers have approached Bitcoin, it offers a possibility that did not exist before: monetizing idle energy.


(slide 236)
Intermittent sources such as wind or solar have periods of lots of sun or wind in which a large energy surplus is produced. But there are also periods when there is no wind or only rain and production is reduced. At these times, these sources even need to purchase energy from other locations to be able to feed the local grid.

So for the energy industry, Bitcoin is a magnificent tool because it stabilizes the grid and provides more predictability. In other words, when they produce excess energy, these sources turn on the miners and receive bitcoin and in periods of low production they turn off the miners and use the accumulated bitcoin to buy more energy from other sources, if necessary.

This means that bitcoin stimulates renewable sources in a way that was not possible before, avoids energy waste and provides more predictability for the entire renewable sources industry.


(slide 237)
In addition to stimulating renewable sources, Bitcoin is also becoming carbon negative by collaborating with refineries and landfills to prevent polluting gases from being released into the atmosphere.

Methane gas is 86x more polluting than CO2 and is a by-product of oil extraction and the putrefaction of waste in landfills. That's why these places set the gas outlet on fire before releasing it into the atmosphere, like in this photo. It is preferable to throw CO2 into the air than methane, which is absurdly more polluting. And they have nothing to do with CO2, if it accumulates there is a risk of explosion.

This is why refineries and landfills are starting to mine Bitcoin. Ultimately they waste energy, methane, and they realized that by plugging into bitcoin mining they can monetize the wasted gas and also PREVENT methane from being released into the atmosphere.

As a container full of ASICs is super easy to install, this mechanism is starting to spread around the world. In this way, Bitcoin prevents both methane and CO2 from being released into the environment and also converts these gases into energy to mine a scarce currency that appreciates in value over time. Until then, no industry had a real use for these gases. Bitcoin, while monetizing and avoiding waste, also prevents these polluting gases from entering the atmosphere. 


(slide 238)
There is even a researcher called Daniel Batten, who is a former Green Peace researcher and also a bitcoiner, who has already shown how Bitcoin is the network that has the most potential to contribute to the environment, because it manages to be carbon negative, it prevents CO2 from entering in the atmosphere while other networks do not offer this possibility. Like Ethereum, for example, which can even become carbon neutral, but does not contribute to being carbon negative, as shown in the image.

According to Daniel's research, Bitcoin could use 24% of all landfill methane by 2030 and the waste industry could end up joining the Bitcoin industry.


(slide 239)
In other research by Daniel Batten, he shows how bitcoin is the most ESG industry in the world. It has grown a lot in sustainability in the last two years and is more sustainable than any other sector, such as banks, industries, agriculture, gold mining, metallurgical and zinc recycling.


(slide 240)
This graph shows that even if bitcoin continues to grow and any metric increases, such as hashrate, users, price and addresses, network emissions will be the same at the end of any cycle. Something no other industry has ever managed to do.


(slide 241)
In just four years, Bitcoin halved the intensity of CO2 emissions. In such a short period of time, it had the lowest carbon emissions of any major global industry. A reduction that would collapse any other industry.

This is also a consequence of the ban on bitcoin mining in China in 2021. Most sources there use coal, which is very polluting. The simple fact that miners moved to other locations with renewable and abundant sources, such as hydroelectric plants, caused bitcoin to reduce CO2 emissions by half, and it did so without crashing once, the network continued to function normally.


(slide 242)
So much so that this graph shows that Bitcoin's main energy source is currently hydroelectric. Because Bitcoin mining is not anchored to the global grid, 36.7% of which uses coal, it is also the only major industry where fossil fuels are not the main source of energy. This is a slap in the face to anyone who says that bitcoin destroys the environment.


(slide 243)
Even Bitcoin in landfills reduces greenhouse gas emissions by 50x more than any other form of Bitcoin mining, such as mining with wind, solar, hydro or flared gas from refineries.


(slide 244)
This all just proves that the talk that Bitcoin uses a lot of energy is ignorance or lies from those who are on the side of the banks and fiats to keep people away from Bitcoin out of fear. Or those who don't see the value in Bitcoin and think everything is bad without even stopping to analyze reality. It's just to make bitcoin a scapegoat.


(slide 244)
The World Economic Forum itself posted in 2017 that Bitcoin would consume all the world's energy by 2020, a fact that did not happen. In 2017, the newspapers began to fill the newspapers with this FUD. It was a big lie that only shows how the owners of the fiat system are terrified of Bitcoin, because it takes the printer out of their hands. 


(slide 245)
In addition to banks, governments and other protocols, even Greenpeace started a campaign demonizing Bitcoin, spreading the message far and wide that it is bad for the planet and that the code would need to be changed. In 2023, GreenPeace launched the "change the code" campaign, a manifesto for Bitcoin to abandon the proof of work model. They demonized bitcoin in various ways, the leader of the campaign appeared at a Solana conference attacking bitcoin, pushing the idea that bitcoin had to change its code and be proof of stake like Ethereum.


(slide 246)
The curious thing is that Greenpeace itself accepted donations in bitcoin. What made them change their mind and start attacking bitcoin?


(slide 247)
Exactly. Money. Greenpeace received 5 million dollars from executives at Ripple, the company that created the cryptocurrency XRP, to defame bitcoin and try to force changes through social pressure and lies.

This is the most bizarre thing I've ever seen. Greenpeace abandoned its purpose and scruples for money. He attacked precisely the protocol that could help the organization reduce emissions and be more environmentally friendly. Surreal! Just take a look at a snippet of the video from this campaign:


(slide 248)
Greenpeace paid an artist named Von Wrong to make a skull with laser eyes to show how bitcoin creates climate damage. They wanted to make something like a bitcoin horror movie.


(slide 249)
But in the end, all attacks end up strengthening bitcoin even more. Bitcoiners loved the skull, it became a meme and a symbol of how bitcoin is evil and deadly, but for central banks and fiat currencies and not for the planet.

Bitcoiners loved the metal atmosphere of the work of art, appropriated the narrative and started making memes like this one: they took the photo of the Greenpeace car, which was campaigning against bitcoin, and changed the phrase to Buy bitcoin, or Compre Bitcoin , which was brilliant and people shared this meme a lot on social networks.


(slide 250)
With all the fuss, several bitcoiners contacted Von Wrong, the artist who made the skull, explained the graphics that I showed here in this class and days later the artist posted about how he didn't know everything about bitcoin, that the skull was a great accident and that bitcoin is indeed a positive force for the environment. And the cardboard of the lies told was once again for Greenpeace.


(slide 251)
This all happened in March 2023, but now it appears the narratives are changing. New studies and reviews of previous studies are emerging and providing more real evidence and not attacks financed by crypto-fiat. This article from the Financial Times says it like this:

"Bitcoin's large electricity consumption could end up being a benefit... it could absorb excess supply of energy generated through renewable sources such as solar and wind."

And yet this other article says "...bitcoin can support the development of sustainable energy". Finally, newspapers are starting to publish these studies and review old articles.

And worse, at the end of 2024 it came to light that GreenPeace's "Change de Code" campaign was closed due to running out of funds. Finally, the great irony!


(slide 252)
Well, I could have just shown this image in this topic, but perhaps I wouldn't give the dimension of the data and how much bitcoin actually helps us advance in energy, environmental and civilizational issues.

On the left is a photo of a gold mine. Observe how destructive it is. Not to mention the contamination by heavy metals and the landslides that occur. On the right appears a Bitcoin mining farm coexisting in the middle of nature. If one day it leaves there, there will be no hole left and no type of local environmental impact, on the contrary.

Mining is being integrated with local industries such as plant and fish production using heat, a byproduct of mining, to be even more efficient.

I hope this class made it clear to you that bitcoin does not destroy the environment and those who do this the most are actually fiat structures.

I hope you understood the main FUDs that are being spread about Bitcoin. It is important to remember that, from time to time, new FUDs emerge, so stay alert and always do your own research so as not to fall for the wireless story invention.

Now that you know what bitcoin is, how it works, ways to have it and the main lies about it, in the next class you will learn why storing your bitcoins sovereignly is important. Until then.
