(slide 120)
Now that you understand how the Bitcoin blockchain works and that it needs consensus among participants for decentralized coordination to exist, let's understand how the network manages to agree among itself through the mechanism called Proof of Work. (PoW).


(slide 121)
Bitcoin mining is an analogy for the process of searching for something precious, like gold, but on the Bitcoin network that precious thing is the hash of each block. Node gold, the miners keep digging the deposit until they find the precious metal, when they find it, they have something scarce and valuable in their hands. Gold is scarce and over time it becomes more difficult and more expensive to mine gold because you have to dig deeper into the ground. It requires increasingly modern and efficient equipment to access the deepest and most complex deposits.

Something very similar happens with Bitcoin. In the bitcoin network, miners compete with each other, through trial and error, to see who first arrives at the hash that closes each block of information.


(slide 122)
Remember that the block is made up of severalthe components? The hash of the previous block, a timestamp called timestamp and all transaction data?

Along with this information there is also a piece of data called "nonce". Nonce means "number used only once" - a number that can only be used once. When miners use computational power to mine the block it means that they are, at absurd computational speed, trying to find this number that can only be used once by the network. This is the number that all miners are competing to find.

The block header contains the hash that mixes all these components: the hash of the previous block, the timestamp, the root transaction that summarizes all the transactions that entered the block and the nonce.


(slide 123)
A good analogy for this mining process is a puzzle. So in this analogy Bitcoin mining is like a puzzle, a game, in which every 10 minutes miners need to find the missing piece to complete the picture.

Everyone is looking for the correct piece out of all the possibilities and whoever finds it first tries to fit it into the image. When the miner finds the missing piece, it is very easy for everyone to see if it fits together. Just look at the image and see if the piece was correct or not.

This means that mining is a process that is difficult to defraud and at the same time very easy to verify. Just as it is difficult to find the correct piece in a giant puzzle, but it is easy to check whether it was the missing piece or not. Bitcoin is like a global puzzle in which the whole world participates and follows the results in real time.


(slide 124)
The entire mining and consensus process when registering the Bitcoin blockchain works like this:

Miners employ computational power, buying powerful machines with great computational power to try to find the block nonce as quickly as possible. When they find it, they create the hash, show it to the network, and the nodes check if the proposed block is following the rules. If everything is ok, this block is inserted into the blockchain, propagated across the network and all participants insert this block into their copies of the blockchain. And in the end, miners receive Bitcoin as a reward for completing the task.

This entire process is known as proof of work.


(slide 125)
Proof of work means that the miner found the nonce, created the block hash, followed the rules and provided a computational service to the network. When all the block information is found, it goes through the encryption process of turning the information into a cryptographic puzzle using SHA-256. The result is that huge number below, which represents the block's hash, the result of all the miner's work. 


(slide 126)
This process is not exclusive to Bitcoin, but anything that can be encrypted, and SHA-256 is the algorithm that does this. THE SHA-256 takes information of any size and creates a 256-bit sequence: a series of 256 zeros and ones. From this huge number full of 01010101, the algorithm creates a hexadecimal sequence made up of 64 digits between letters and numbers that is easier to write down. In other words, it is easy to check if it is correct, but it is practically impossible to forge the information that has been encrypted.

Trying to randomly hit a hash and break SHA-256 encryption is practically impossible. It involves an absurdly high number of possible combinations,[ are more ](https://www.universetoday.com/36302/atoms-in-the-universe/#:~:text=At%20this%20level%2C%20it%20is,hundred%20thousand%20quadrillion%20vigintillion%20atoms.)numbers than the number of atoms in the observable universe! This would require such a large number of attempts that it would take a normal computer billions of years to accomplish this.

That's where the story of the quantum computer comes in! People often ask us if a quantum computer could break Bitcoin's encryption. This is one of the great hopes of Bitcoin haters, but the truth is that no quantum computer would probably be able to kill Bitcoin.

Underneath this class I will leave a article which explains this.


(slide 127)
<https://codebeautify.org/sha256-hash-generator>

I want to show you one [site](https://codebeautify.org/sha256-hash-generator) very cool. It's this one, called code beauty. This site allows you to try and convert any information into a SHA-256 function.

I'm going to type Bitcoin4All here and look at how the code in the box below changes with each letter, space or punctuation entered. This is what happens to the Bitcoin network block hash if any information is modified. Also note how fast it was, it didn't require mega computing power to find this hash. So if it was that easy to create a hash here on this website, why on the Bitcoin network does it take 10 minutes and is it no longer possible to mine from your home computer?


(slide 128)
This has to do with a mechanism called difficulty adjustment.

Difficulty adjustment has the role of regulating the issuance of new Bitcoin. It is this adjustment that ensures that the average creation of new blocks and the reward delivered by the network is 10 minutes. This is because for every 2016 blocks mined, around 15 days on average, you have an algorithm that will analyze the amount of computational power in the network and increase or decrease the difficulty of finding the block's hash.

If from one moment to the next the number of miners increases a lot, the network will regulate itself to increase the mining difficulty so as not to accelerate the speed at which new blocks are created and consequently not to accelerate the speed at which new Bitcoins are created. 


(slide 129)
It works like this: as more miners join the network and the hashrate increases (the rate at which new blocks are created), miners begin to find blocks more easily and the average mining time between one block and another becomes faster. The network realizes this through algorithms and increases the mining difficulty, as a result the speed of creating new blocks drops, because it becomes more difficult for miners to find blocks, until it stabilizes at an average of 10 minutes between one block and another.

This is how the network regulates itself with increasing demand so as to never lose its predictability.


(slide 130)
You can know the level of difficulty of mining each block according to the number of zeros that appear before the block's hash number. This block, for example, has 24 zeros in front of the hash code, was mined in October 2022 and is one of the blocks that had the most difficulty being mined at the time.

The miner's objective is to assemble a block where the hash code is smaller than the current target (penultimate blank line). The smaller the target, the harder it is to find a valid block. The more miners on the network, the more difficult it becomes.


(slide 131)
In other words, the more zeros leading a hash, the more difficult it is to mine, the more the miner had to search for the block's nonce until he found it.


(slide 132)
It is because of the difficulty adjustment that mining has evolved and it is no longer so easy to mine from your home PC, from a CPU. Today bitcoin mining is done with specific machines called ASICS. As the price of Bitcoin rose, it ended up attracting more and more people, more computing power was being used in the network and with this the difficulty adjustment algorithm rose to maintain the average of one block mined every 10 minutes.

As the difficulty increased, more tuned-in people began to use more powerful machines: GPUs, widely used in gaming computers. Bitcoin continued to attract more and more people wanting to mine, until they decided to create a specific machine: ASICs.

This type of machine is much more powerful and beats CPUs and GPUs in the speed of finding the block hash. Mining has become a giant and dedicated industry, which tirelessly seeks efficiency. In other words, producing the maximum amount of Bitcoin with the minimum amount of energy or with cheap energy.

So the price doesn't matter. Bitcoin could reach 10 billion dollars. The speed at which new bitcoins are issued does not change. Even the increase in hashrate power cannot lead to the issuance of more Bitcoin beyond what is planned for each halving cycle. The addition of more miners to the network does not produce more bitcoin, but it makes the network more secure and decentralized.


(slide 133)
And why does this mechanism make the network more secure? This happens because the greater the computational power, the more difficult it is to attack the network. In this graph, the line represents the hashrate, the computational power, and the redder colors represent the difficulty of mining each block. The difficulty and hashrate have increased exponentially since bitcoin started running. As the line turns orange, the greater the difficulty of mining a block. The greater the computing power, the more the network has adapted to protect Bitcoin's properties. This is why Bitcoin has no competitor in mining, it is the protocol with the most miners distributed around the planet and with the greatest computational power of all.


(slide 134)
Bitcoin is 631 times more powerful than the world's top 500 supercomputers combined, depicted in the white line, and Bitcoin is shown in the orange line. Bitcoin has the most attack-resistant computing network and is 600x stronger than any centralized computing system or data center.

However, the advancement of mining did not stop at ASICs. Over time, even though we had a super powerful machine, it became increasingly difficult to find blocks and miners ended up grouping themselves into pools. They pool computational power to have a better chance of finding blocks and sharing the reward.


(slide 135)
Mining pools work between Bitcoin software and miners, allowing miners to pool the computing power of their machines and have a better chance of finding a block. Pool comes from the word pool in English, a concentrate of grouped computing power.


(slide 136)
To give you an idea of ​​how difficult it is to mine outside of a pool, that is, to mine solo, an S19JPRO, which is one of the most modern ASICS machines, has a 0.000 000 208% chance of mining a block of Bitcoin. This means one chance in almost 4.8 billion attempts over the entire lifetime of the machine, which lasts on average 5 to 8 years. This probability will continue to decrease over time, as more miners arrive, the hashrate rises and the difficulty increases. 


(slide 137)
That's why pools are like a pool of computational power, when someone finds the block everyone shares the reward in Bitcoin proportional to each person's hash power. This way, miners can earn frequent revenue instead of waiting for luck to find a block on their own, which can take years and still has no guarantee of happening.


(slide 138)
Today the Bitcoin network has dozens of pools, but five of them are the largest and account for most of the hashrate: Foundry, Antpool, F2Pool, ViaBTC and Mara. Although many people say that this would be a centralization mechanism, in reality miners can leave the pool at any time and go to another, or they can even mine solo if they want to try their luck. In other words, the concentration in these five largest pools was a natural market movement by the miners themselves wanting to be in the pools with the highest probability of finding blocks and sharing the rewards. Pools do not rule the network, because it is the nodes that check and decide whether the mined blocks are valid or not.

And the last very important point in the functioning of Bitcoin are halvings, which have everything to do with mining. As time passes, Bitcoin becomes increasingly scarce. Increasing scarcity coupled with growing demand is what has caused parabolic price movements in Bitcoin. It is the halving that causes Bitcoin to gradually become more scarce and at the same time creates cycles of appreciation that have been repeated.


(slide 139)
Halving comes from the word "halfing" and means "cut in half" in English. This means that for every 210,000 blocks mined, on average every 4 years, the protocol cuts the reward given to miners in half.


(slide 140)
The first halving took place on November 28, 2012, at the very beginning of the network. At the time, the Bitcoin network produced 50 bitcoin per block of information processed. That is, every 10 minutes, on average, at that time, miners received 50 btc as a reward. With the 2012 halving, miners started receiving 25 bitcoin per block mined.

In 2016, the second halving took place, in block 420 thousand, and cut the issuance in half again. Instead of receiving 25 bitcoin per block, each miner now receives 12.5 bitcoin per block mined. And the third halving took place in 2020, on May 11th, in block 630 thousand, where miners started to receive 6.25 btc per block.

The last recorded halving, the fourth, took place in April 2024 at block height 840 thousand. The next one will be in 2028. And the cool thing about all this is that we know in advance which block it will be in, at block height one million and 50 thousand. The new reward will be 1.5625 bitcoin for miners.


(slide 141)
This image demonstrates how with each step of the orange line, that is, with each halving, Bitcoin slowly becomes more scarce and approaches the unit supply limit, on the blue line.

This image is incredible because it shows how Bitcoin is transparent, programmable, and has a predictable monetary policy that cannot be expanded or modified. It is something very different from any other asset or currency that changes monetary rules or policies at any time.

The last satoshi will be mined in the year 2140 and that is when the issuance of new bitcoins will end. Only network fees will be the source of revenue for miners to pay operating costs.


(slide 142)
And this table here is another way of showing the same thing. This table shows the entire monetary policy of Bitcoin, from the first satoshi, the first halving to the last halving in 2140.

This table shows that more than 90% of Bitcoins have already been issued and that, by the year 2036, 99% of Bitcoins will be mined. The remainder, the other final 1% will be created from 2036 to 2140. It takes 110 years to mine 1% of the bitcoin supply!

In the year 2030, the biggest source of income for miners will probably be fees. At this moment, the demand for Bitcoin must be very high, to the point that the fees charged by miners support their operation, including the maintenance of the machines and the energy cost, and no longer so much the reward for the block.


(slide 143)
When we talk about 2140 there is fear of the unknown and the question: "what happens when the last bitcoin is mined?"

The answer is: nothing. This big change starts much earlier. By 2030, fees will tend to be the main source of income for miners. By the time 2140 arrives, miners will likely be receiving much more in fees than the few satoshis offered by the network, because of the currency's increasing scarcity, rising fiat price, and increased network usage.

And why is halving so important?


(slide 144)
Halvings create a "supply shock": fewer Bitcoins become available while demand remains the same. With each halving, the amount of Bitcoins created per block is cut in half. This reduces supply, which causes the price to rise. If a lot of people want to buy Bitcoin and it is not possible to create more units, the only way to convince hodlers to sell is by offering a higher price.


(slide 145)
Hodlers are bitcoiners who accumulate bitcoin for the long term and do not sell even during the biggest short-term drops. the term hodler it became a meme because a guy on bitcoin talk, a famous bitcoin forum, typed it wrong and people adopted the slang to differentiate it from the traditional stock market crowd. This image on the screen is a print of the post that gave the hodlers their name: bitcoiners who hold bitcoin tightly and do not sell at all.

This rise forms parabolic movements, attracts general attention, Bitcoin is in the news and increases demand even further. This is where the mind-blowing euphoria of the bullrun begins.

This happens because the only way to have the same liquidity to satisfy new buyers is to increase the premium so that those who have Bitcoin change their mind and want to sell. It is the simplest law of economics: the law of supply and demand. If there is a lot of demand and supply reduces, prices rise. As the number of Bitcoin is limited to 21 million units and there is no way to issue more, when demand increases, the only way for supply to meet demand is for the price to rise.

Halvings cause supply shocks that cause bitcoin to rise until a new price discovery. This entire process creates cyclical movements of appreciation and contraction until the new price is defined. 


(slide 147)
Bitcoin cycles are made up of four phases. The first phase is the BEAR, when the market is bears. This is when the price drops a lot after a period of highs and that's when those who entered the high leave. 2011, 2014, 2018 and 2022 were bear years for Bitcoin. This is when only negative news comes out and those who were tourists in Bitcoin leave.

After the bear comes a VERY agonizing phase, which is the accumulation phase. Which is when bitcoin sits aside for an entire year. Nothing happens, it's pure boredom and it seems like it will never end.

The next phase is the expansion or growth phase. When bitcoin starts to rise slowly, like someone who wants nothing. It is the phase in which haters attack because they do not believe in a new rise and bitcoiners begin to renew their hopes that a new bull run is approaching. 2012, 2016, 2020 and 2024 were years of expansion.

And finally comes the bull run, the bull run. When bitcoin reaches the peak of the cycle and runs like a rampant bull with nothing able to hold it back. This phase is just joy, euphoria and the haters disappear! Bitcoin becomes popular, attracts attention and reaches a new price level. When the euphoria passes, the drop comes and a new price floor is established, and everything goes back to the beginning, to the bear phase. It's a mental and emotional rollercoaster. 


(slide 148)
So much so that to measure the emotional state of the market, the fear and greed index was created. Where the closer to 0 means "Extreme Fear", and the closer to 100 represents "Extreme Greed".


(slide 149)
Generally people want Bitcoin to appreciate in a straight line, but the biggest rises took a year to reach the peak of the movement. Here I brought us closer to analyzing the price of Bitcoin during halvings. From the halving to the top of the cycle it has taken about a year to reach ATH (all time high), but this does not happen in a straight line, the graph fluctuates a lot, but with an increasing average of appreciation. Bitcoin appreciated 11 thousand percent after the first halving, 2,500 percent after the second halving and one thousand percent after the third halving in 2020, when it reached its last ATH at 69 thousand dollars. In 2024 the fourth halving took place, Bitcoin has already reached $100k and whoever lives will see how far the price can go in this cycle.


(slide 150)
But everything that goes up, also comes down. Bitcoin despite having had large valuations and they have decreased in intensity over the years, the same has happened with the falls.

In 2012 Bitcoin had a brutal drop of 93%, after the first halving 84%, in the second it fell 84% again and in the last halving the drop was 77%, lower than the previous bears. It means that over time bitcoin is becoming less volatile. Obviously you are far from walking in a straight line, but it is already possible to observe this trend.


(slide 151)
What can also be observed is that Bitcoin has had increasingly higher lows throughout the cycles. In 2012 bitcoin was worth less than one dollar, in 2014 the minimum was ten dollars, in 2016 one hundred dollars, in 2019 one thousand dollars and in 2022 ten thousand dollars.

In other words, no matter how much Bitcoin falls, it has maintained increasingly higher minimum prices over time. But will it always be like this? Will Bitcoin continue to appreciate forever?

This is the subject of the next class. Now that you've learned how bitcoin works and Bitcoin's cycle history, it's time for you to understand why it tends to continue growing in the long term. Until then.
