Have you ever heard the phrase "Bitcoin has no top because fiat has no bottom"? Bitcoin tends to continue to appreciate more and more in the long term, even with a lot of volatility. This is because everyone needs and demands solid money. Nobody wants money that loses value year after year, right?

In addition to being solid money, Bitcoin can digitize trust. What the world demands most are reliable ways to conserve energy and value. Even before Bitcoin, there was no certainty in the fiat system that money would not be diluted, modified or have its properties manipulated. Bitcoin tends to continue growing and being adopted because it has brought mathematical certainty to the economy.


(slide 152)
This calculation summarizes the economic incentives behind Bitcoin. The total number of coins that can exist is the sum of the number of bitcoins mined in each block. For every 210,000 blocks that the network processes, this averages out to every 4 years, this block reward is cut in half. A total of 32 halvings are projected to take place and this progression ends in block 6 million nine hundred and thirty thousand, when all bitcoin coins will have been mined.

This results in: 20 million, nine hundred and ninety-nine thousand btc with ninety-seven million, six hundred and ninety thousand satoshis. In other words, the limit of 21 million is a mental rounding so as not to make it difficult to speak and explain.

This calculation is poetic. It is mathematical and historical proof that Bitcoin is the first mathematically scarce, predictable and programmed money from launch until the last Satoshi is mined. It means that Bitcoin is the first money in which the rate of monetary inflation and the speed at which new currencies are created are known decades in advance. Monetary inflation in Bitcoin, instead of increasing, as happens in fiat currencies, it decreases. This is why prices tend to fall in relation to Bitcoin and it tends to continue appreciating in relation to fiat money.

There is nothing, no financial system in the world that has a level of predictability similar to this. And tell me, how much is this level of trust worth?

Most people have never encountered deflationary, independent, uncensorable, digital money. Ultimately, Bitcoin is a monetary technology, money that has superior technology and properties. Therefore, the price of Bitcoin reflects its adoption process.


(slide 153)
It has to do with the speed at which new technologies are adopted. Older technologies took around 100 years to be used by almost 100% of the population, such as the telephone, lights and cars. This delay in adoption forms the well-known S-curve of adoption, as it appears in the electricity or telephone line.

New technologies such as the internet, cell phones and smartphones took around 10 to 20 years to be adopted. The S-curve has turned into a J- or I-curve, where adoption is vertical and faster.


(slide 154)
This is why bitcoin tends to have an adoption more similar to new technologies, even though it is something that disrupts centuries of money monopoly by centralized entities. This image shows where we are in adoption speed using the performance of recently launched ETFs in the US. The speed of adoption was vertical and higher than any other previously launched ETF. Bitcoin is seeing J or I adoption like the internet or cell phone users. This is what this study by the Fidelity manager shows.


(slide 155)
Yesrrien Timmer, who is the director of Global Macro at Fidelity Investments, posted this graph comparing bitcoin appreciation models if it followed the speed of cell phone or internet adoption. If bitcoin keeps up with the speed of the cell phone, its price would make a movement similar to the blue line, reaching 239 thousand dollars in 2025 and would exceed one million in 2030. If it follows the speed of the internet then it will go slower, 100 thousand dollars in 2025 and 343 thousand dollars in 2023. The most interesting thing is that Bitcoin has been in the middle, it was 100 thousand dollars in 2024 and Fidelity's projection was between 80 thousand dollars if it followed the trajectory of the internet and 150 thousand dollars if it followed the adoption of cell phones.

In other words, depending on demand and comparing with the adoption of other technologies in the past, you can get an idea of ​​the speed of adoption and consequent appreciation of bitcoin.


(slide 156)
Bitcoin is already showing signs of how its adoption is faster than other financial technologies. The Bitcoin ETF itself, when launched in 2024, did in 8 months what the gold ETF took 19 years to do: reach 33 billion dollars in value of assets under management. THENote how Bitcoin reached this mark in a vertical line, while the gold ETF made the classic S-curve of older technologies.

Bitcoin tends to continue to appreciate in value because it is a superior financial technology, which has high demand and limited supply, and should continue to do so. After all, the world is just starting to learn about Bitcoin and accumulate it.

That's why as Bitcoin is adopted, valuation theories begin to emerge.


(slide 157)
The Stock-to-Flow (S2F) model measures the scarcity of an asset by calculating the relationship between the current stock (stock) and the annual production flow of new units (flow). In other words, it compares how much has already been produced with how much there is still to produce. The higher the S2F, the scarcer the asset is. This model was originally used to assess scarcity of precious metals such as gold and silver. 


(slide 158)
In the case of Bitcoin, the S2F model became popular because it has a higher and much more predictable S2F ratio than any other asset. It was a matter of time before a model emerged that tried to project the price of Bitcoin based on its degree of scarcity. Known as PlanB, the creator of Bitcoin's S2F model argues that there is a historical correlation between the increase in S2F and the price of Bitcoin, suggesting that scarcity drives appreciation. 

However, if on the one hand the model is useful visually for understanding the increasing scarcity with halvings and Bitcoin's dynamics throughout the cycles, on the other hand it is not a future price prediction. Because the model was modified several times and this image on the screen dates back to the creator's initial projection. 

But it is important to remember that scarcity, immutability and the trend of increasing demand for money that appreciates in value are what drive Bitcoin to ever greater heights in the long term.


(slide 159)
Ark Investments, another manager that is very famous globally for having funds with different types of technology, also made a price projection for Bitcoin at the beginning of 2023.

According to their report, Bitcoin is a long-term opportunity and that, despite the year 2022 being turbulent, bitcoin remained firm and strong. Its fundamentals strengthened and hodlers developed a long-term vision. The contagion effect that occurred in 2022 with the bankruptcy of Celsius and FTX made Bitcoin's value proposition as decentralization and transparency even more evident. And they also mentioned that Bitcoin could surpass one million dollars in the next decade.


(slide 160)
In the calculations, they establish 3 possible scenarios: the pessimistic (bear case), the median (base case) and the optimistic (bull case). All until the year 2030. And consider these scenarios if bitcoin absorbs part of the liquidity of other markets, such as gold, institutional investments, as a censorship-resistant asset, as a currency in emerging countries in crisis, as part of the national treasury, as an asset of remittances and as an asset on company balance sheets. Shocking how bitcoin can be part of all these categories, no asset can fulfill all these roles...

So let's see what they estimated. If Bitcoin has a CAGR, an average compound annual growth, of 40% per year until 2030 it could be worth $258,000 per unit. And believe me, this growth is pessimistic, it is in the bear case category.

In the base case, the median scenario, Bitcoin would have a CAGR of 60% per year and a price in 2030 of 682 thousand dollars per unit. And in the bull case, the optimistic scenario the CAGR would be approximately 75% per year and the price would be 1.48 million dollars per Bitcoin.

It is from this perspective of Bitcoin absorbing value from other asset classes that several calculations emerge that treat Bitcoin as a financial sponge.


(slide 161)
Absorption theories are the theories that bitcoin will suck up liquidity and value that would go to other assets, as investors agree to increasingly expose themselves to it and add it to their portfolio. These theories consider Bitcoin to be a sponge that slowly sucks liquidity from the fiat system full of bad investments and negative interest rates.


(slide 162)
According to Jesse Meyers, Bitcoin could capture 25% of global wealth and could be worth 10 million dollars in the future. <https://www.onceinaspecies.com/p/bitcoins-full-potential-valuation>

He posted this in the article "Bitcoin's Full Potential Valuation".


(slide 163)
<https://www.onceinaspecies.com/p/bitcoins-full-potential-valuation>

He explains that bitcoin competes for liquidity with all assets, as shown in this image. It competes with assets that lose value such as vehicles and products, it competes with inflationary assets such as fiat currencies, it competes with scarce assets such as gold, real estate and collectibles, it competes with equities that encompass scarce assets and also those that pay returns on growth. Bitcoin tends to grow more than everyone else, because it mixes all of this into a single asset in the initial stage of appreciation and growth.


(slide 164)
According to surveys that Jesse carried out, bitcoin can absorb 50% of the market capitalization of gold, 5% of the market capitalization of collectibles, 5% of the art market, 15% of the stock market, 15% of the real estate market, 30 % of government bonds and 30% of the value in cash. Which could take bitcoin to a market capitalization of 10 trillion dollars, approximately 10 million dollars per Bitcoin, or 50 million reais per unit of bitcoin. 


(slide 165)
Bitcoin had a market cap of 400 billion dollars when Jesse made this calculation in February 2023. If Bitcoin absorbed half of gold's market capitalization it could multiply by 30x in value. And if it reaches its full potential, the appreciation could be 500 times.


(slide 166)
And now some classic baker's calculations that have been circulating on the internet since the time when Hal Finney exchanged messages with Satoshi Nakamoto.


(slide 167)
In email exchanges between Hal Finney and Satoshi, they even calculated how much a unit of bitcoin could be worth if he absorbed all the world's wealth. At the time, the world's wealth was somewhere between 100 and 300 trillion dollars. Dividing this by 21 million units would give about 10 million dollars per Bitcoin. 


(slide 168)
Today wealth in the world is around 900 trillion dollars, divided by 21 million would be equivalent to 40 million dollars per unit of bitcoin. I'm not even discounting the lost bitcoins, which would further increase the scarcity and value of bitcoin in this calculation. 


(slide 169)
Another theory that has been gaining traction is that bitcoin could demonetize bonds, government securities, due to the drop in confidence in them. As investors and people lose confidence in governments that they can pay their debts to creditors and in their printing presses, it is possible that liquidity that would go into government assets will no longer go. Remembering that government bonds are considered the safest and most risk-free. Which is not true, governments fail all the time around the world.

As Bitcoin is much more transparent, auditable, verifiable and immutable than politicians, it is likely that people will trust it much more than governments who act in their own interests. That's why Ark Investments' Cathie Wood and risk manager Greg Foos have been talking about how Bitcoin can absorb value from bonds and even replace bonds in the future.


(slide 170)
According to Greg Foss, governments and the fiat system are supported by debt and this debt can be the trigger for a massive loss of confidence. In this situation, Bitcoin would come to be seen as insurance against the government itself.

The bond market, government bonds, is worth around 400T dollars, these bonds are given as guarantees for debts between banks and governments among themselves. If 10% of this value leaves these securities and goes to Bitcoin, the bitcoin market cap could reach 40 trillion dollars. 40 trillion divided by 21 million units, would give 2 million dollars per bitcoin, or 10 million reais per unit.

This is only with a small change in people's perception of risk. If the world realizes that fiat currencies are a bubble, this could happen even faster.


(slide 171)
Michael Saylor, founder of Microstrategy also projected Bitcoin in three different scenarios: pessimistic (bear), base or optimistic (bull). In this calculation he projected the price of Bitcoin until 2045, if it absorbed 2%, 7% or 22% of the value of global assets. According to Saylor's analysis, in the worst case scenario, if Bitcoin absorbs just 2% of the value that is in other asset classes it could reach 3 million dollars per BTC in the next 20 years. In the base case, it would reach 13 million per unit and in the bullish case, it would reach an impressive 49 million dollars per unit.

That's why looking at Bitcoin at 100 thousand dollars, at current levels, seems extremely cheap when compared to the potential projected by various studies and calculations.


(slide 172)
Even the Simpsons have already predicted the price of Bitcoin. In one of the episodes, a news sign appears that suggests that the price of Bitcoin has gone to infinity. But it's obvious that no one took this projection seriously, despite The Simpsons having already corrected several real situations. 


(slide 173)
This Simpsons prediction of Bitcoin going to infinity is basically what the Stock To Fomo chart shows, which is a rapid adoption chart and a satire on Stock To Flow. Imagine if the world went into desperation mode and decided to buy Bitcoin in a hurry? The result would be this graph. A large vertical and upward risk.

That's why FOMO: fear of missing out, which means fear of missing the chance to buy.


(slide 174)
It sounds crazy, but this has happened before. It's that saying: history doesn't repeat itself but it rhymes. In Germany, in 1914, with the hyperinflation of the German mark, gold entered a vertical parabolic movement. When the fiat currency at the time collapsed, gold appreciated just like the Stock To Fomo chart. In other words, Bitcoin does not need to explode in adoption to have a graph like this. If fiat currencies go into hyperinflation, each country could have a graph like this in their local currencies, only not in gold anymore, but in Bitcoin.


(slide 175)
This is why traditional fiat investors are only now starting to realize that Bitcoin volatility is not necessarily a bad or dangerous thing. Because just as it falls a lot, its recovery is much faster than any traditional asset. In addition to not permanently melting in value like fiat currencies do.

This is what this image shows, in which the Fidelity manager, for a period of 2 years, compared bitcoin, at the end of the list, with several other traditional assets, such as fiat currencies, gold, shares, bonds, etc. Bitcoin had the biggest drop, but also the biggest returns.

This shows how volatility and drops do not mean risk, but rather great buying opportunities for those who are already in the sovereign mindset and understand that in the long term Bitcoin should continue to grow in adoption and value.


(slide 176)
It is because of the greater understanding of Bitcoin and everything we have explained so far on Bitcoin4All that people, companies and countries are accumulating and entering the Bitcoin industry.

Steve Wozniak (founder of Apple), Stanley Druckenmiller (renowned investor), Cathie Wood (manager of Ark Investments), Robert Kiyosaki (author of the book Rich Dad, Poor Dad) and Jack Dorsey (founder of Twitter, now X), are examples of entrepreneurs in different niches who support Bitcoin. Companies like Microstrategy, Block, Tesla and Rumble also added Bitcoin to their cash registers. Even countries already have Bitcoin, whether buying or mining it, as is the case with El Salvador and Bhutan, or even indirectly through seizures, as is the case with the USA and China.


(slide 177)
Bitcoin should continue to appreciate because people are looking for reliable money that does not lose value and is predictable. This is why, despite the volatility, the Bitcoin price chart shows an upward trend, also reflecting its increasing adoption.

In this class you understood why Bitcoin should continue to appreciate in the long term and we presented you with calculations and future price projection models. This class probably gave people FOMO, right? But it is important to say that these are theses, projections, and in fact there is no way of knowing in the short term what will happen with Bitcoin. Anyone who says they know is lying to you. You can just prepare yourself for all scenarios, both up and down and keep your feet on the ground.

At the end of the day, Bitcoin is a global and long-term trend. Preparing today is easier than regretting not getting involved in 10 or 30 years. In the next class you will learn how to have Bitcoin and how to start accumulating it. Until then.
