The race to have Bitcoin has already begun and if you are thinking about having a whole bitcoin, you better be quick because time is running out and it will get increasingly difficult. But the good news is that there are 2.1 quadrillion satoshis and you can gradually accumulate fractions of bitcoins until you reach your entire Bitcoin.


(slide 178)
Today, the world has about 8 billion people. As Bitcoin has a maximum issuance limit of 21 million units, which will be issued by the year 2140 and most of these have already been mined, this means that if everyone in the world wanted to have Bitcoin, each one could have a maximum of 0.002625 BTC. This is equivalent to approximately 260 thousand satoshis, or about 245 dollars, considering the current price of 94 thousand dollars per Bitcoin.

There is not enough whole Bitcoin for every person in the world, not even for every millionaire. But there are satoshis in abundance to be distributed among all inhabitants of the Earth. This is because 1 Bitcoin is made up of 100 million satoshis, which makes a whole Bitcoin just a form of rounding.

It is worth remembering that this estimate is based on the limit of 21 million Bitcoin. But it is unlikely that all of these Bitcoins are actually available, as around 20% of them have been lost and are in inaccessible wallets. This makes Bitcoin even more scarce than one might imagine. 


(slide 179)
There are three ways to have Bitcoin. The first and most classic way is mining. It is through mining that new bitcoins enter the market and it is a way for you to receive bitcoin directly from the network when you provide work for it. You employ computing power, help mine a block and receive Bitcoin as a reward. Of course, nowadays you need powerful equipment to mine a large amount of Bitcoin, but it's something you can study, specialize in and start competing in mining.

The second way to have Bitcoin is to buy from someone who has Bitcoin. Today there are also platforms that facilitate this purchase, such as exchanges, platforms, vouchers and even banks that are selling Bitcoin. Today it is much easier to buy Bitcoin than it was 10 years ago.

And the most independent and cypherpunk way to have Bitcoin, other than mining, is by accepting it as payment in exchange for products or services you offer. Let's understand how each of these ways works.


(slide 180)
Mining is a way of receiving Bitcoin directly from the network, without having to buy from another person or platform. Mining has become a highly specialized industry, with operations ranging from small individual miners to large mining farms. These farms use advanced technologies and, in many cases, take advantage of energy that would otherwise be wasted by less efficient industries. 


(slide 181)
You don't need to have a large mining farm to get started. It is possible to mine Bitcoin at home, as long as you are willing to learn how the machines work, perform maintenance, optimize energy efficiency and understand electrical wiring well. After all, it was with home mining that it all started and it is through this that this practice could become increasingly accessible and common in the future.


(slide 182)
Currently, there are machines like Bitaxe and Nerdaminer, which have reduced computing power compared to the powerful ASICS. Despite this, they can be connected to a mining pool to receive small satoshis rewards or even used to try your luck at solo mining. Mining solo and finding a block is like hitting the lottery, the chances are minimal, but the prize is worth it.

Bitcoin mining is constantly evolving, and who knows, in the future, maybe even kitchen appliances will be helping to mine Bitcoin!

In addition to mining, you can also buy Bitcoin from another person or company that has bitcoin.


(slide 183)
And when it comes to buying bitcoin, there are several ways to do it. You can buy through exchanges, which are platforms that work like digital exchange houses. You can buy from another person who has Bitcoin, the famous P2P (peer-to-peer). You can purchase vouchers or gift cards that can be redeemed for Bitcoin. You can buy through social networks that have Bitcoin buying and selling channels such as Telegram or Nostr. And finally, currently even banks sell Bitcoin and you can buy through them.

But what are the advantages and disadvantages of each of these ways?


(slide 184)
Exchanges are companies that connect buyers and sellers, ensuring that both sides that are negotiating receive what is being negotiated in a practical way. The exchange is an intermediary between two people who don't know each other and who want to trade bitcoin.


(slide 185)
So, for example, here in this image there are Ana and João. They both have accounts on the same exchange and they don't know each other and won't know each other. Ana wants to buy bitcoin and João wants to sell bitcoin. The two place an order on the exchange.

Ana placed an order to buy bitcoin at a price of 100 thousand dollars and João created an order to sell bitcoin at a price of 100 thousand dollars. So, here in this example, one wants to buy and the other wants to sell for the same value as the bitcoin price at that moment. And so this negotiation worked. The orders of one and the other are executed at the broker, João's bitcoin balance is settled in fiat and Ana receives the bitcoin balance that previously belonged to João in her account within the exchange.


(slide 186)
These buy and sell orders that I mentioned are made through a mechanism called an order book or order book. This is the classic way of trading on an exchange, but today there are other ways besides this, there are simplified ways where you don't see these orders.

In this image here we can see the list of sales orders in red and below, in green, the lists of purchase orders. Each order in the book includes the price at which someone is willing to buy or sell Bitcoin, as well as the amount of Bitcoin they want to buy or sell at that price. Orders are generally arranged in price order. There you can see that purchase orders are organized from the highest to the lowest price that buyers are willing to pay. Sell ​​orders are arranged from the lowest to the highest price that sellers are willing to accept.


(slide 187)
The big advantage of buying on exchanges is practicality. In just a few minutes you can open an account, transfer fiat currency and you can start buying bitcoin. However, if you are looking for privacy, this will not be the best way to buy, as these are companies and as such they follow the regulations of their countries. Most ask for KYC, which means know your customer, that is, customer data at the time of registration. They usually have a lower negotiation limit with basic data and if you want to negotiate larger amounts, they ask for more documents.


(slide 188)
And although today the market is more mature and it is relatively safe to buy from these companies, it still has risks. Today, if you want to undertake and open an exchange, you will have to go through bureaucracy, you will have to ask the government for permission to operate in this market and you will have to follow the rules of the country where you are opening the company. Despite not being banks, exchanges function like banks and are under the eyes of regulators.

The idea of ​​regulation is to eliminate bad actors from the market, but even so it does not prevent these companies from failing due to poor management or hacks. On exchanges, the biggest risk is hacker invasions and leaks of private data. It has happened in the past that hackers have invaded exchanges and stolen bitcoin balances and this has led to several exchanges closing their doors. 


(slide 189)
Another risk is bankruptcy. In the case of partners and managers not knowing how to manage the business, or carrying out illegal operations, as happened with FTX, and the exchange goes bankrupt. If a hacker attack happens or the broker goes bankrupt, it could take years of legal proceedings to get the money back or you could never get your bitcoin back. Many people have already lost Bitcoin like this.


(slide 190)
This is why an exchange is not a wallet and you should not leave your bitcoins in it for long periods of time. Exchange is an access platform just for you to buy and withdraw Bitcoin for your own custody. Leaving bitcoin on an exchange is exposing yourself to the risk of the platform going bankrupt or being hacked and taking your coins with it.

These are platforms that facilitate exchanges between people, but they do not provide the private keys to customers' wallets, only the address, which is why on the exchange the bitcoin is not yours because you do not have the private keys that allow you to move your coins autonomously. We will talk more about this in the following classes about portfolios and sovereignty.

Now let's move on to P2P forms of purchase.


(slide 191)
Do you remember the Bitcoin whitepaper? What was written on it? Satoshi wrote in the title of the white paper "Bitcoin: a peer-to-peer, peer-to-peer electronic payment system", and in the early days of the Bitcoin network, negotiations were basically done like this, directly between people. Nowadays, even with so many exchanges and digital accounts to choose from, the P2P way of trading remains firm and strong and will probably never cease to exist, because no matter how much a country prohibits the use of bitcoin, it is decentralized and open source, so there is no way to prevent people negotiate between itself in a P2P way.


(slide 192)
The biggest advantage of buying P2P is having less bureaucracy and a little more privacy. So for example, buying via P2P you don't need to send all the documents that an exchange often asks for, do facial recognition, send proof of income and address. There are exchanges that are as bureaucratic as a bank.

Another advantage is that P2P sends the bitcoin balance directly to the address, which could be your cold wallet, for example. It's very practical and one less step for you to do. On the other hand, it has disadvantages and risks. As everything is generally done directly online, there is no intermediary company, so you have to make sure that the P2P you choose is trustworthy. You need to trust that the person will not disappear with your money and that you will receive the equivalent in bitcoin back in your wallet. There are P2Ps who have been working in the market for a long time and are honest people, but there are scammers too, like in every market.

So how to detect that a P2P is a scammer? First, a P2P will never contact you via Facebook Messenger, Instagram, Telegram or even WhatsApp offering bitcoin. No serious P2P does this. If they contact you in this way there is a high chance of it being a scam.

Another situation that could happen, if it is a scammer, is that you send the amount to the P2P's bank account and the person simply disappears with your money. The scammer will block you on your cell phone, on social media and disappear with your money.

But then where can you find reliable P2P? Anyone can sell you Bitcoin, it could be a friend who has Bitcoin and needs fiat or someone who does this as a profession. Many P2P work alone, with their own website or connected to an exchange, but the best thing is to find it through a recommendation from someone you trust. Another way is to buy on platforms like Bisq and Hodl Hodl that connect people with each other.


(slide 193)
In total there are 4 steps when purchasing via P2P.

The first is that you already have an address in a bitcoin wallet, you will learn how to do this in the next Bitcoin4all classes.

Second, you will contact a trusted P2P and ask for a quote for the amount you want to purchase. Once the quote is approved, you send the amount in fiat and your bitcoin address so P2P can send the balance to you. Finally, you wait for the shipment and monitor receipt through a tracking code on the Bitcoin network that P2P will provide you. And that's it!

Another way to buy Bitcoin is using vouchers.


(slide 194)
Vouchers are gift certificates where you buy a value and redeem it in your digital wallet, as is the case with AZTECO and Bitrefill. Buying Bitcoin through vouchers is more private than through exchanges and you receive the redeemed balance directly in your wallet. 


(slide 195)
There are also online platforms such as Robosats and Mostro on the NOSTR protocol that allow the purchase and sale of bitcoin in a P2P manner in discussion groups without necessarily having a centralized company intermediating the operations. This type of purchase generally offers more privacy and less data linkage to your Bitcoin purchases.

The important thing about this type of purchase is to make sure you are using the correct platform and not a fake version of them. 


(slide 196)
Nowadays, banks and digital accounts also allow the purchase of Bitcoin. The main difference between these digital accounts and exchanges is that, in digital accounts, you buy Bitcoin directly from the institution, while in exchanges, the purchase is made from other people who have entered sell orders on the platform.

Regardless of where you acquire your Bitcoins, it is essential to transfer them from these platforms to your own wallet and avoid leaving them in the custody of third parties. Both banks and exchanges are subject to the same risks, such as bankruptcy, hacker attacks or even government seizures.


(slide 197)
It's 2025 and traditional financial institutions are vying for space to offer Bitcoin ETFs. ETF is the acronym for Exchange Traded Fund, which stands for exchange-traded fund. These funds allow investors to buy and sell shares directly on the Stock Exchange, in a similar way to shares, and can be used to trade different types of assets, such as commodities and, now, Bitcoin.

Os ETFs spot of Bitcoin aim to replicate the price of Bitcoin on the spot market, following its price. The main advantage of Bitcoin ETFs is that they offer a regulated way for companies and investors, who normally would not or could not have Bitcoin in their own custody, to indirectly expose themselves to Bitcoin.

These ETFs created a bridge between Bitcoin and the traditional financial market, establishing Bitcoin as a new asset class recognized in this environment. Additionally, ETFs increase demand for Bitcoin, as funds theoretically need to buy and sell Bitcoin as investors acquire or dispose of ETF shares. In other words, they could not trade Bitcoin without those transactions being backed by purchases or sales of real Bitcoin in the market.


(slide 198)
Just pay attention! ETFs are not real Bitcoin, they are paper Bitcoin that only represent the price of Bitcoin. It does not have the monetary properties or network effect of Bitcoin. They need a manager issuing these papers and it requires trust in these institutions.

You can't withdraw your bitcoin to your wallet, you need to sell it and convert it to fiat. At least so far, there is still no way to buy ETFs and withdraw them in Bitcoin to your own wallet. This means that when you buy an ETF you don't actually have Bitcoin, you are depending on intermediaries to do the custody for you. This defeats the entire purpose of Bitcoin. You end up exposing yourself only to the price, but you do not have the freedom to transact your currencies.

In addition, there are redemption and trading deadlines within the exchanges' opening hours, during business hours. Bitcoin works 24 hours a day, every day of the week. If the price falls or rises over the weekend, the ETF will only reflect this on Monday. You spend the weekend and holidays without being able to buy or sell.

This time gap is an eternity if tense news starts to emerge about the possibility of management companies going bankrupt or something like that.

Another risk is rehypothecation, of issuers making risky operations with customers' Bitcoins that may only appear years later and be a headache. It would be something like them using customers' BTC to provide collateral for loans to buy other assets. This is not something so unrealistic to happen, this is basically how FTX went bankrupt in 2022. This type of operation, using clients' money, is obviously illegal, but the market does things behind the scenes that we cannot even imagine. In this rehypothecation situation, if the price of Bitcoin plummets they could be liquidated and lose their customers' BTC.

Another risk is the poor management of the private keys of the bitcoins they have under management. Some managers take custody of clients' bitcoins, but most ETFs use exchanges to custody the bitcoins they sell. Coinbase, for example, holds the bitcoins of most American ETFs. In these cases, the risk is that these third-party custodians, these exchanges, will go bankrupt or mismanage the keys.

Another risk is seizure by the Government. If bitcoin becomes a global reserve asset and this threatens global hegemonies, a government can easily confiscate BTC from these regulated players. It is easier to confiscate money from these intermediaries than from people who keep the keys themselves. From one day to the next they invent a bank holiday and people lose access to their own wealth. With bitcoin in banks and regulated management companies, it is very easy for governments to confiscate them.


(slide 199)
And finally, the most sovereign way to have bitcoin is to offer your work, products and services, your time, in exchange for bitcoin. You transform your work and profit margin into an accumulation strategy and receive it directly without needing to convert anything, it goes straight to your wallet. You even save on fees by doing this.

There are websites and platforms like Bitcoiner Jobs where you can look for jobs at companies that pay in bitcoin. Be it something temporary or fixed. Behance also already has a tab where you can choose to pay for design work in Bitcoin.

You can offer your services to other bitcoiners you know and start your own local circular economy with your friends. After all, for you to receive payment in Bitcoin, someone will have to pay you in Bitcoin. If a group uses Bitcoin as its currency, it is much easier to start with these people. Furthermore, if you generate incentives, such as a discount, people will be willing to spend a few sats to get this discount if your product is good. After all, no one exchanges bitcoin for a poor quality product.


(slide 200)
Accepting Bitcoin as a payment method offers several advantages that can modernize and simplify financial operations. One of the main ones is the absence of KYC (Know Your Customer). The Bitcoin network does not force anyone to identify themselves, just download a wallet and start receiving Bitcoin. It also has the advantage of taking advantage of the current price. When receiving payments in Bitcoin, the value is transferred immediately, at the current exchange rate, avoiding giant spreads and delays common in transactions that depend on financial intermediaries.

The Lightning Network also makes life a lot easier, because it allows fast transactions with extremely low fees, being especially advantageous for payments of small amounts. Compared to fees charged by credit cards or other payment gateways, this represents a huge savings in fees for merchants that they can pass along as a discount to customers. 

When you receive Bitcoin directly, there is no need for banks or payment companies, which reduces costs, speeds up receipt and avoids problems with fraudulent chargebacks or unjustified cancellations.

For those who already accept Bitcoin, receiving directly from customers is cheaper than buying from exchanges or platforms that charge additional fees. This practice also encourages circular economies, where payments and receipts in Bitcoin strengthen adoption, local use and reduce the need to convert to fiat currencies, saving time and money.

But it also has some disadvantages that need to be considered. One of them is that few use Bitcoin for payments. Even though adoption is growing, the number of people who pay in Bitcoin is still not large. Furthermore, there are many people who don't want to spend at all, they just want to receive.

Lack of knowledge is also a challenge. Many people even want to receive it but don't understand how it works, find it difficult and become discouraged. Accepting Bitcoin requires knowledge of how to set up a secure digital wallet and, in many cases, how to use the Lightning Network for fast and cheap transactions. For those just starting out, this learning curve can be an obstacle.

But little by little circular economies are becoming more and more known, those who want to receive and pay in Bitcoin are starting to create a local microcosm of P2P exchanges.


(slide 201)
A Bitcoin circular economy is when Bitcoin is used continuously within a sustainable cycle, without the frequent need for conversion to fiat currencies. This model increases adoption, strengthens local communities and reduces dependence on financial intermediaries, creating a more autonomous and efficient system.

A circular economy starts with purchasing or receiving Bitcoin. A person can acquire Bitcoin by mining, buying on exchanges, accepting it as payment for products or services or even receiving it as a salary. Thus, it now has a decentralized and global asset, which can be used without the need for banks or intermediaries.

Instead of converting your Bitcoin to fiat currency, it directly uses Bitcoin to pay for products and services at local businesses that accept it. Merchants who receive Bitcoin can choose to keep part of their revenue in Bitcoin, as a form of savings with potential for appreciation over time, or they can also choose to pay employees and suppliers who also accept Bitcoin. 

This continuous cycle of payments and receipts reduces the need for conversions to fiat and increases the use of Bitcoin as money.

Bitcoin's circular economy concept is a natural evolution of adoption, increasing financial independence, strengthening local economies and economic sustainability. For communities that embrace this model, Bitcoin becomes not just a tool of exchange but also a catalyst for innovation and economic resilience.

Well, I hope this class helped you understand that there are multiple ways to have Bitcoin, now it's up to you to try it and see which of these ways suits you best. The cool thing is that you can use all these mechanisms to continue accumulating. I'll wait for you in the next class.
